This book comprises 17 chapters in all, spread across four sections. It isn't necessary to read
the book straight through if you're already comfortable with some of the material. For
example, if you're already comfortable with basic RTOS concepts and real-time systems,
feel free to skip to Chapter 4 , Selecting the Right MCU. The following are brief descriptions
of the chapters that this book is made up of:
Chapter 1 , Introducing Real-Time Systems, is a simple introduction to what an RTOS is and
when and why to use one. Hardware and software alternatives to an MCU-based RTOS are
also discussed.
Chapter 2 , Understanding RTOS Tasks, provides a comparison of super loops with RTOS
tasks, including various ways parallel operations can be achieved using both.
Chapter 3 , Task Signaling and Communication Mechanisms, is a short introduction to more
RTOS concepts with lots of diagrams. This chapter, along with Chapter 2 , Understanding
RTOS Tasks, should be useful as a reference and a quick refresher on the concepts and
terminology, should you ever need it.
Chapter 4 , Selecting the Right MCU, helps you understand what considerations should be
made when selecting an MCU. After gaining an appreciation of the inter-dependency
between hardware and firmware, we look at why it is so important that hardware and
firmware engineers both have a hand in system design.
Chapter 5 , Selecting an IDE, introduces and discusses various types of Integrated
Development Environments (IDEs), including reasons why you might decide to choose
one over another (or none at all). Instructions on setting up STM32CubeIDE and importing
the example code are covered here.
Chapter 6 , Debugging Tools for Real-Time Systems, covers tools for debugging embedded
systems, including the debugging tool we'll be using throughout the remainder of the book
– SEGGER Ozone and SEGGER SystemView visualization software. Instructions on how to
use Ozone and SystemView are covered here. Hardware-based test equipment and some
other useful tools for your embedded system development workflow are also included.
Chapter 7 , The FreeRTOS Scheduler, teaches you the various ways to create tasks using
FreeRTOS and how to troubleshoot startup failures. You will gain an understanding of task
states and the different ways performance can be optimized.
Chapter 8 , Protecting Data and Synchronizing Tasks, covers task synchronization using
semaphores and data protection using mutexes, as well as how to avoid race conditions
and priority inversion. Software timers are also covered.
